Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Belcampo Meat Company.
Belcampo Meat Company is a regenerative farm
in Northern California that raises organic, grass-fed,
and grass-finished certified humane meats.
I eat meat about once a day.
I'm neither pure carnivore nor am I a vegetarian,
obviously, I eat meat.
The way I eat is I tend to fast until about noon,
and then I have my first meal,
which generally consists of a piece of beef,
you know, it's either ground beef or a steak.
I like ribeyes, I like flat irons, these kinds of things,
and a small salad, sometimes a large salad.
And then throughout the day,
I generally am low carb until the evening
when I eat pasta and rice and things of that sort.
Eating that way is what optimizes my levels of alertness
and optimizes my sleep.
I've talked about this on previous podcast episodes.
Now, because I eat meat essentially every day,
the source of that meat is extremely important to me.
I want it to be healthy for me,
and I want the animals that it comes from to be healthy
and to have lived a good life.
Conventionally raised animals are confined to feedlots
and they eat a diet of inflammatory grains,
which is terrible for them,
and it's terrible for us when we eat those meats.
Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures
and seasonal grasses, which results in meat
that is higher in nutrients and healthy fats.
They actually have very high levels of omega-3s,
which I've also talked about on this podcast
are important for mental and physical health
for a variety of reasons.
The way Belcampo raises its animals
is also good for the environment.
They practice regenerative agriculture,
which means it's climate positive and carbon negative,
which translates to good for us and good for the planet.
You can order Belcampo sustainably raised meats
to be delivered straight to your door using my code Huberman
by going to belcampo.com slash Huberman,
and you'll get 20% off your first time order.
That's belcampo.com slash Huberman for 20% off.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting blood work done
for the simple reason that many,
if not most of the factors that impact
our immediate and long-term health
can only be assessed from a blood test.
And now with the advent of modern DNA tests,
we can get additional information
about our current health status and our health trajectory.
One of the major problems with blood tests and DNA tests
available for most sources is that you get the numbers back
and you can easily see whether or not those numbers
are within the standard range or outside the range,
but it's very hard to know what to do with that information.
Also, what the various factors are that are being measured
is often very cryptic.
With Inside Tracker, they clarify everything.
They make it very clear and simple
as to what each of those factors relates to.
So they give you some understanding of what those are
and they give you ideas and suggestions
about things that you can do with your lifestyle,
changes to your diet, changes to your supplementation,
changes to your sleep schedule or exercise patterns
that can serve to optimize the levels
of those various factors and your DNA.
In addition, they have something called the Inner Age Test,
which compares your chronological age,
which you already know, with your biological age,
which gives you a sense of your lifespan
or predicted lifespan.
So that's crucially important.
And you can imagine why many people, including me,
would want that information.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman
and you'll get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Use the code Huberman at checkout.
That's insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans
and use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been using Athletic Greens for well over a decade now.
I started using Athletic Greens
and I still use Athletic Greens
because I find it rather dizzying
to know which vitamins and minerals to take.
And with Athletic Greens,
I cover all my bases of vitamins and minerals.
In addition, it has probiotics.
And we now know from an enormous number
of quality peer-reviewed studies
that the gut microbiome is critically important
for our immune system function,
for the gut brain axis and for our mental functions.
And probiotics are one way to support the gut brain axis
and the gut health generally.
With Athletic Greens, I basically just add water,
put in a little bit of lemon juice
because that's the way I like it,
mix it up, it tastes delicious.
I'll do that once or twice a day.
It's compatible with fasting, at least for me.
It doesn't take me out of a fasting mode,
which I do early in the day.
So most often I'll have my Athletic Greens early in the day
and then sometimes I'll also have another one
late in the evening or sometimes even before bed.
I'm able to sleep after drinking it without a problem.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman.
And if you do that, you can claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs,
which are these little packs that make it very easy
to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road
or in the car or on a plane,
makes all of that very simple.
And in addition, they will give you a year supply
of vitamin D3K2.
There are also a lot of data supporting the fact
that vitamin D3 is critical for a variety of health metrics.
We all know that we can get vitamin D3 from the sun,
but many people, including me,
we're not getting enough sunlight or D3.
Even if I was getting a lot of sunlight,
I know that because I had my blood levels measured of D3.
So I use vitamin D3 every day
in addition to the other things I take,
including Athletic Greens.
If you go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman,
you'll get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs,
and a year supply of the vitamin D3 and K2.
That's athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to claim the special offer.
This month on the Huberman Lab Podcast,
we're talking all about physical performance.
So that means athletic performance, recreational exercise,
weightlifting, running, swimming, yoga,
skills and skill learning.
Today, we're going to talk about and focus on skill learning.
We are going to focus on how to learn skills more quickly,
in particular motor skills.
This will also translate to things like musical skills
and playing instruments,
but we're mainly going to focus on physical movements
of the body that extend beyond the hands,
like just playing the piano
or the fingers like playing the guitar.
But everything we're going to talk about
will also serve the formation and the consolidation
and the performance of other types of skills.
So if you're interested in how to perform better,
whether or not it's dance or yoga
or even something that's just very repetitive
like running or swimming, this podcast episode is for you.
We're going to go deep into the science of skill learning
and we are going to talk about very specific protocols
that the science points to and has verified
allow you to learn more quickly,
to embed that learning so that you remember it
and to be able to build up skills more quickly
than you would otherwise.
We are also going to touch on a few things
that I get asked about a lot,
but fortunately recently I've had the time
to go deep into the literature, extract the data for you
and that's mental visualization.
How does visualizing a particular skill or practice
serve the learning and or the consolidation
of that practice?
Turns out there are some absolutely striking protocols
that one can use, striking meaning they allow you
to learn faster and they allow you to remember
how to do things more quickly and better
than if you were not doing this mental rehearsal,
but the pattern of mental rehearsal
and when you do that mental rehearsal
turns out to be vitally important.
So I'm excited for today's episode.
We're going to share a lot of information with you
and there are going to be a lot of very simple takeaways.
So let's get started.
Before we get into the topic of skill learning
and tools for accelerating skill learning,
I want to briefly revisit the topic of temperature,
which was covered in the last episode
and just highlight a few things
and clear up some misunderstandings.
So last episode talked about these incredible data
from my colleague Craig Heller's lab at Stanford.
He's in the department of biology
showing that cooling the palms in particular ways
and at particular times can allow athletes
or just recreational exercisers
to do more pull-ups, dips, bench presses per unit time
to run further, to cycle further
and to feel better doing it.
There really are incredible data
that are anchored in the biology of the vascular system,
the blood supply and how it's involved in cooling us.
Many of you, dozens of you in fact, said, wait a second,
you gave us a protocol in this episode
which says that we should cool our palms periodically
throughout exercise in order to be able to do more work.
But on the episode before that
on growth hormone and thyroid hormone,
you said that heating up the body
is good for release of growth hormone.
And I just want to clarify that both things are true.
These are two separate protocols.
You should always warm up before you exercise.
That warm up will not increase your body temperature
or the muscle temperature to the point
where it's going to diminish your work capacity,
that it's going to harm your performance.
The cooling of the palms,
which is really just a route to cool your core
in an efficient way, the most efficient way in fact,
is about improving performance.
Heating up the body with exercise
and focusing on heat increases
or using sauna for heat increases
is geared toward growth hormone release
which is a separate matter.
So you can do both of these protocols,
but you would want to do them at separate times.
So just to make this very concrete
before I move on to today's topic,
if you're interested in doing more work,
being able to do more sets and reps per unit time
and feel better doing it or to run further
or to cycle further,
then cooling the palms periodically
as I described in the previous episode
is going to be the way to go.
If you're interested in getting growth hormone release,
well then hot sauna and I offered some other tools
if you don't have a sauna
in the episode on growth hormone and thyroid hormone
is going to be the way to go.
Okay, so those are separate protocols.
You can include them in your fitness regime
and your training regime,
but you do want to do them at separate times.
And as a last point about this,
I also mentioned that caffeine
can either help or hinder performance
depending on whether or not you're caffeine adapted
because of the ways that caffeine impacts body temperature
and all sorts of things like vasodilation and constriction.
It's very simple.
If you enjoy caffeine before your workouts
and you're accustomed to caffeine,
meaning you drink it three or five times or more a week,
100 to 300 milligrams is a typical daily dose of caffeine.
Some of you are ingesting more, some less.
If you do that regularly,
well then it's going to be just fine
to ingest caffeine before you train.
It's not going to impact your body temperature
and your vasodilation or constriction
in ways that will hinder you.
However, if you're not a regular caffeine user
and you're thinking, oh, I'm going to drink a cup of coffee
and get this huge performance enhancing effect.
Well, that's not going to happen.
Chances are it's going to lead to
increases in body temperature
and changes in the way that blood flow
is happening in your body
and in particular on these palmer surfaces and in your face
that is going to likely diminish performance.
So if you enjoy caffeine and you're accustomed to it,
so-called caffeine adapted, enjoy it before your training.
If you regularly, excuse me, if you do not
regularly use caffeine,
then you probably do not want to view caffeine
as a performance enhancing tool.
And while we're on the topic of tools
and because this is a month on athletic performance
and exercise and physical skill learning,
I want to offer an additional tool
that I've certainly found useful,
which is how to relieve the so-called side stitch
or side cramp when running or swimming.
This actually relates to respiration
and to the nervous system.
And it is not a cramp.
If you've ever been out running
and you felt like you had a pain on your side,
that pain could be any number of things,
but that what feels like cramping of your side
is actually due to what's called collateralization
of the phrenic nerve,
which is a lot harder to say than a side cramp
or a side stitch.
But here's the situation.
You have a set of nerves,
which is called the phrenic nerve, P-H-R-E-N-I-C,
the phrenic nerve, which extends down
from your brainstem essentially, this region,
to your diaphragm to control your breathing.
It has a collateral, meaning it has a branch,
just like the branch on a tree that innervates your liver.
And if you are not breathing deeply enough,
what can happen is you can get
what's called sometimes a referenced pain.
Reference pain is probably going to be familiar
to any of you who have ever read
about how to recognize heart attack.
People who have heart attacks will sometimes have pain
on one side of their body, the left arm.
Sometimes people that have pain in a part of their back
will suddenly also get pain in their shoulder
or part of their face.
This has to do with the fact
that many of our nerves branch
and are meaning they're collateralized
to different organs and areas of the body.
And the way those nerves are woven together,
it's often the case that if we disrupt the pattern of firing
of electrical activity in one of those nerve branches,
that the other ones are affected too.
The side stitch, the pain in your side,
is often because of the contractions of the diaphragm
because of the way you're breathing while you're exercising,
running or swimming or biking.
And as a consequence, you feel pain in your side,
but that's not a cramp.
The way to relieve it is very simple.
You do the physiological side that I've talked about
in previous episodes of the podcast and elsewhere,
which is a double inhale through the nose, very deep,
and then a long exhale.
And you might want to repeat that two or three times.
Typically, that will relieve the side stitch
because of the way that it changes the firing patterns
of the phrenic nerve.
So the side stitch is annoying, it's painful.
Sometimes when you think we're dehydrated
and you might be dehydrated,
but oftentimes it's just that we're breathing in a way
that causes some referenced pain of the liver.
We call it a side stitch or a side cramp,
and you can relieve it very easily
through the double inhale, long exhale.
That pattern, done two or three times.
Often you can continue to engage in the exercise
while you do the double inhale, exhale,
and it will just relieve itself that way.
So give it a try if you experience the side stitch.
Some people I know are also doing the double inhale,
long exhale during long continuous bouts of exercise.
I actually do this when I run.
We have decent data,
although these are still unpublished data
that can engage a kind of regular cadence
of heart rate variability.
So there are a number of reasons
why this physiological side can be useful,
but it certainly can be useful for relieving the side stitch
or so-called side cramp.
Let's talk about the acquisition of new skills.
These could be skills such as a golf swing or a tennis swing,
or you're shooting free throws,
or you're learning to dance,
or you're learning an instrument.
I'm mainly going to focus on athletic performance.
There are basically two types of skills,
open loop and closed loop.
Open loop skills are skills
where you perform some sort of motor action
and then you wait and you get immediate feedback
as to whether or not it was done correctly or not.
A good example will be throwing darts at a dartboard.
So if you throw the dart,
you get feedback about whether or not you hit the bull's eye
and you're off the dartboard
or you're some other location on the dartboard.
That's open loop.
Closed loop would be something that's more continuous.
So let's say you're a runner
and you're starting to do some speed work and some sprints
and you're running and you can kind of feel
whether or not you're running correctly
or maybe even have a coach
and they're correcting your stride
or you're trying to do some sort of skill
like a hopscotch skill,
which maybe you're doing the ladder work
where you're stepping between designated spaces
on the ground.
That's closed loop because as you go,
you can adjust your behavior
and you can adjust the distance of your steps
or you can adjust your speed
or you can adjust your posture
and you are able to essentially do more practice
per unit time,
but you're getting feedback on a moment to moment basis.
Okay, so you have open loop and closed loop.
And just to make this very, very clear,
open loop would be practicing your tennis serve.
So let's say that you set a target
on the other side of the net,
you throw the ball up and you hit the ball,
it goes over, that's open loop.
You'll know whether or not you were in the court,
you were on the location you wanted to hit
or close to it or not.
That's open loop.
Closed loop would be if you're in a regular case.
So maybe you're learning a swim stroke
or maybe you're trying to learn a particular rhythm
on the drums.
So maybe you're trying to learn a particular beat.
I'm not very musical,
so I'm not going to embarrass myself
by giving an example of this,
although later I will,
where you're trying to get a particular rhythm down
and if you're not getting it,
you can adjust in real time and try and catch up
or slow down or speed up, et cetera.
Okay, so hopefully you'll understand open loop
and closed loop.
You should always know before you try and learn a skill,
whether or not it's open loop or closed loop.
And I'll return to why that's important shortly.
But if you want to learn something,
ask is it open loop or closed loop?
There are essentially three components of any skill
that involves motor movement.
And those are sensory perception,
actually perceiving what you are doing
and what's happening around you.
So what you see, what you hear,
sometimes you're paying attention
to what you're doing specifically,
like the trajectory of your arm
or how you're moving your feet if you're learning to dance.
Sometimes you're more focused on something
that's happening outside of you,
like you're listening for something in music
or you're paying attention
to the way your partner is moving, et cetera.
So there's sensory input.
Then there are the actual movements, okay?
So there are the movements of your limbs and body.
And then there's something called proprioception.
And proprioception is often discussed
as kind of a sixth sense of knowing where your limbs are
in relation to your body.
So proprioception is vitally important.
If I reach down and pick up this pen and pick it up,
I'm not thinking about where the pen in my hand is
relative to my body,
but proprioceptively I'm aware of it
at kind of a sixth cent deeper subconscious level.
I can also make myself aware of where my limbs are.
And typically when we learn,
we are placing more focus on proprioception
than we do ordinarily.
So if I get up from this chair
and I happen to walk out of the room,
I don't think about where my feet are landing
relative to one another.
But if my leg had fallen asleep
because I had been leaning on one of the nerves of my leg
or something like that,
and my leg feels all tingly or numb,
I and you, if this were to happen,
you would immediately notice a shift in gait.
It would feel strange.
I'd have to pay attention to how I'm stepping.
And the reason is
I'm not getting any proprioceptive feedback.
Now, skill learning has a lot of other dimensions too,
but those are the main ones that we're going to focus on.
So just to remind you,
you need to know open loop or closed loop,
and you need to know whether or not, excuse me,
you need to know that there's sensory perception,
what you're paying attention to,
movements themselves and proprioception.
And there's one other important thing that you need to know,
which is that movement of any kind
is generated from one, two, or three sources
within your nervous system, within your brain and body.
These are central pattern generators,
which are sometimes called CSPGs.
Excuse me, CPGSs.
CSPGs are something entirely different in biology.
CPGSs, this just goes to show that I have a module.
CSPGs are chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans.
They have nothing to do with this topic.
CPGSs are central pattern generators,
or CPGs they're sometimes called.
These CPGs are in your spinal cord,
mine and yours, different ones,
and they generate repetitive movements.
So if you're walking, if you're running,
if you're cycling, if you're breathing,
which presumably you are,
and you're doing that in a regular rhythmic cadence,
central pattern generators are controlling that movement.
After you learn how to walk, run, swim, cycle,
do anything really, much of the work is handed off
to the central pattern generators.
And there were experiments that were done
in the 60s, 70s, and 80s
that actually looked at the cerebrate animals
and even the cerebrate humans.
These are humans and animals that lack a cerebral cortex.
They lack much of the brain,
and yet they can engage in what's called a fictive movement.
So it sounds like a kind of barbaric experiment.
I'm glad I wasn't the one to have to do them,
but this is the stuff of neuroscience textbooks
that cats or dogs or mice
that have their neocortex removed,
put them on a treadmill, they'll walk just fine.
And they will adjust their speed of walking just fine,
even though they basically lack
all their thinking decision-making brain.
And it turns out humans that have,
unfortunately, massive strokes to their cortex
and lack any neocortex,
but preserve the central pattern generators,
will also walk just fine,
even though they lack any of the other stuff in the brain.
So these CPGs or CPGSs are amazing,
and they control a lot of our already learned behavior.
When you're really good at something,
CPGs are controlling a lot of that behavior.
And that's true also for a golf swing,
even if it's not really repetitive.
Somebody who's really good at golf is going to,
I guess you call it a tee.
You put the ball on the tee.
I show my knowledge of golf.
I've only done mini golf, frankly,
but someday maybe I'll learn how to golf,
but you set the golf ball down and swing.
Set the golf ball down, swing.
Central pattern generators are going to handle a lot of that.
If I were to go to the golf course,
Stanford has a beautiful golf course,
if I were to go out there and put a ball on the tee,
my central pattern generators
would not be involved in that at all.
The moment I get, you know, bring the club back to swing,
it's going to engage other things.
And the other things it's going to engage,
because I don't know that behavior now or then,
is upper motor neurons.
We have motor neurons in our cortex,
in our neocortex that control deliberate action.
And those are the ones that you're engaging
when you are learning.
Those are the ones that you have to pay attention
in order to engage.
And that's what's happening, for instance,
if I decide I'm going to reach down and pick up my pen,
which I rarely think about,
but now I'm thinking about it
and I'm going to do this in a very deliberate way,
I'm going to grab with these two fingers and lift,
my upper motor neurons are now involved, okay?
So upper motor neurons are very important
because a little bit later in the episode,
when we talk about how to use visualization
in order to accelerate skill learning,
it's going to leverage these upper motor neurons
in very particular ways, okay?
So we have CPGs for rhythmic movement,
upper motor neurons for deliberate unlearned movements
or movements that we are in the process of learning.
And then we have what are called lower motor neurons.
Lower motor neurons are the ones in our spinal cord
that send little wires out to our muscles,
which actually cause the firing of those muscle fibers, okay?
So the way to think about this
is you've got upper motor neurons,
which talk to CPGs and to lower motor neurons.
So it's really simple.
And now you know most everything there is to know
about the neural pathways controlling movement,
at least for sake of this discussion.
So anytime we learn something,
we have to decide what to place our sensory perception on,
meaning what are we going to focus on?
That's critical.
If you're listening to this
and you're the type of person who likes taking notes,
this should be the second question you ask.
Remember the first question is,
is it open loop or closed loop?
The second question should be,
what should I focus my attention on?
Auditory attention, visual attention, or proprioception.
Should I focus on where my limbs are relative to my body
or should I focus on the outcome?
Okay, this is a critical distinction.
You can decide to learn how to do a golf swing
or learn how to shoot free throws
or learn how to dance tango
and decide that you are going to focus
on the movements of your partner
or the positions of your feet.
Maybe you're going to look at them.
Maybe you're going to sense them.
You're going to actually feel where they are.
Or maybe you're going to sense
the position and posture of your body,
which is more proprioceptive, okay?
So you have to allocate your attention.
And I'm going to tell you how to allocate your attention best
in order to learn faster.
So these are the sorts of decisions that you have to make.
Fortunately for you, you don't have to think about
whether or not you're going to use your upper motor neurons
and your lower motor neurons or not,
because if you don't know how to do something,
you're automatically going to engage
your upper motor neurons.
And if you do, you are all right,
then you're not going to use your upper motor neurons.
You're mainly going to rely on central pattern generators.
You are always using your lower motor neurons
to move muscle.
So we can really simplify things now.
I've given you a lot of information, but we can simplify it.
Basically open loop or closed loop, that's one question.
And what am I going to focus on?
And then your neurology will take care of the rest.
So now I want to talk about realistic expectations.
Somewhere in Hollywood, presumably,
it got embedded in somebody's mind
that instant skill acquisition was possible,
that you could take a particular pill
or you could touch a particular object,
or you could have a wand wave over you
and you would suddenly have a skill.
And so that is the result of Hollywood at all.
It doesn't exist, at least not in reality.
And I love movies, but it simply doesn't exist.
Then the self-help literature created another rule
called the 10,000 hours rule.
And frankly, that doesn't really match the literature,
at least the scientific literature either.
I like it because it implies that learning takes time,
which is more accurate than the Hollywood at all
instant skill acquisition rule,
which isn't really a rule, it's a myth.
But the 10,000 hours rule overlooks something crucial,
which is that it's not about hours, it's about repetitions.
Now, of course, there's a relationship
between time and repetitions,
but there are some beautiful experiments
that point to the fact that by simple adjustment
of what you are focused on
as you attempt to learn a new skill,
you can adjust the number of repetitions that you do,
you adjust your motivation for learning,
and you can vastly accelerate learning.
Some of you may recognize this by its internet name,
which is not a scientific term,
which is the Super Mario effect.
There's actually a quite good video on YouTube
describing the Super Mario effect.
I think it was a YouTuber who has,
I think, a background in science.
And he did an interesting experiment,
and I'll talk about his experiment first,
and then I will talk about the neurobiology
that supports the result that he got.
The Super Mario effect relates
to the game Super Mario Brothers,
but you'll see why at the end.
But basically what they did was they had 50,000 subjects,
which is a enormous number of subjects.
Learn a program,
essentially taking words from a computer program
or the commands for a computer program
that were kind of clustered in a column on the right.
So these are the sorts of things
that computer programmers will be familiar with,
but other people won't.
And those commands are essentially,
they essentially translate to things like go forward,
and then if it's a right-hand turn in the maze,
then go right and continue
until you hit a choice point, et cetera.
So it's a bunch of instructions,
but the job of the subjects in these experiments
were to organize those instructions in a particular way
that would allow a little cursor
to move through the maze successfully, okay?
So basically the goal was,
or at least what the subjects were told,
is that anyone can learn to computer program,
and if somebody can just organize the instructions
in the right way,
then they can program this little cursor
to move through a maze, very simple.
And yet, if you don't have any background
in computer programming, or even if you do,
it takes some skill.
You have to know what commands to give
in what particular order, and they made that very easy.
You could just assemble them in a list
over onto the right.
So people started doing this.
Now, there were two groups,
and one half of the subjects,
if they got it wrong,
meaning they entered a command and the cursor would move,
and it was the wrong command
for this little cursor to move through the maze,
they saw a signal jump up on their screen
that said, that did not work, please try again.
That's it.
If they put in the wrong command
or it was in the wrong sequence,
it would say, that did not work, please try again,
and then the subjects would reorganize the instructions,
and then the little cursor would continue,
and if they got it wrong again,
it would say, that did not work, please try again, okay?
The other half of the subjects,
if they got something wrong, were told,
you just lost five points, please continue.
So that's the only difference in the feedback that they got.
Now, I have to confess, I would have predicted
based on my knowledge of dopamine circuitry
and reward contingency and epinephrine and stress
and motivated learning,
and this other thing that we've been told
in many, many books on behavioral economics
and in the self-help literature,
which is that people will work much harder
to prevent losing something
than they will to gain something,
that you hear all the time,
and it turns out that that's not at all what happened.
If they looked at the success rate of the subjects,
what they found was that the subjects that were told,
that did not work, please try again,
had a 68% success rate.
68% of them went on to successfully program
this cursor moving through the maze.
Whereas the ones that were told, you lost five points,
had a 52% success rate, which is a significant difference.
But the source of the success or the lack of success
is really interesting.
The subjects that were told, that did not work,
please try again,
tried many, many more times per unit time.
In other words, they made more attempts
at programming this thing
to allow this cursor to move through the maze.
Whereas the people that were told, you lost five points,
gave up earlier or gave up entirely.
Okay, so let's just step back from this
because to me, this was very surprising.
It violates a lot of things that I had heard
in the kind of popular culture or the self-help literature
that people will work much harder
to avoid losing something than they will to gain something.
And it didn't really fit with what I understood
about reward contingencies and dopamine.
But it did fit well with another set of experiments
that I'm very familiar with from the neuroscience literature
and I'll give you the punchline first.
And then we're going to take what these data mean
and we're going to talk about a learning protocol
that you can use that will allow you to learn skills faster
by willingly participating in more repetitions
of the skill learning.
Meaning you will want to do more repetitions
even if you're getting it wrong some or most of the time.
So the experiment that I want to tell you about
is called the tube test.
And this is generally done in mice
although it's sometimes been done in rats
and it has a lot of parallels to some things
that you've probably seen and experienced
even in human life, in regular life, maybe even in your life.
So here's the experiment.
You take two rats, you put them in a tube
or two mice, you put them in a tube.
And mice and rats, they don't like to share the same tube.
So what they'll do is they'll start pushing each other
back and forth, back and forth.
Sooner or later, one of the rats or mice
pushes the other one out.
The one that got pushed out is the loser.
The one that gets the tube is the winner.
Okay, now you take the winner, you give it a new competitor
and what you find is that the mouse or rat
that won previously has a much higher than chance
probability of winning the second time.
In other words, winning before leads to winning again.
And the reverse is also true.
If you take the loser and you put that loser in
with another mouse, fresh mouse, new mouse,
the loser typically will lose
at much greater probability than chance.
And this is not related to differences in strength
or size or testosterone or any other of the things
that might leap to mind as explanations for this
because those were all controlled for.
Now, that result had been known about for decades
but three years ago, there was a paper published
in the journal Science, Phenomenal Journal,
it's one of the three apex journals,
that examined the brain area that's involved in this.
Turns out it's a particular area of the frontal cortex
for those of you that want to know.
And they did a simple experiment where they,
the experimenters increased or decreased the activity
of this brain area in the prefrontal cortex,
little sub-region of the prefrontal cortex.
And what they found is if they stimulated this brain area,
a mouse or rat, regardless of whether or not
it had been a winner or loser before,
became a winner every single time.
And they showed that if they blocked the activity
of this brain area, regardless of whether or not
the mouse or rat had been a winner or a loser,
it became a loser every single time.
And this translated to other scenarios,
other competitive scenarios,
where they'd put a bunch of mice or rats
in a kind of cool chamber,
they'd have a little heat lamp in the corner
and mice like heat,
and there was only enough space for one mouse
to get the, be under the heat.
And the one that had won in the tube test
or that had the brain area stimulated
always got the nice warm spot, okay?
So what is this magic brain area?
What is it doing?
Well, the reason I'm bringing this up today,
and the reason I'm bringing it up
on the heels of the Super Mario effect
is that stimulation of this brain area
had a very simple and very important effect,
which was it led to more forward steps,
more repetitions, more effort,
but not in terms of sheer might and will,
not digging deeper, just more repetitions per unit time.
And the losers had fewer repetitions per unit time.
So the Super Mario effect, this online experiment,
and the tube test, which has been done by various labs
and repeated again and again,
point to a simple but very important rule,
which is neither the 10,000 hours rule
nor the magic wand Hollywood version of learning,
but rather the neurobiological explanation
for learning a skill is you want to perform
as many repetitions per unit time as you possibly can,
at least when you're first trying to learn a skill.
I want to repeat that.
You want to perform as many repetitions as you possibly can,
at least when you're first trying to learn a skill.
Now that might sound like a duh, it's just more reps,
but it's not so obvious.
There's no reason why more repetitions
should necessarily lead to faster learning
because you could also say, well, more repetitions,
you can make more errors,
and those errors would lead to poor performance,
like misstepping a number of times.
And in these cases, there's very little feedback, right?
It's not like every time the rat pushes forward
or moves back that it is sensing, oh, I'm winning,
I'm losing, I'm winning, I'm losing on a micro level.
It probably does that as it starts to push the other one out
the rat or mouse probably thinks I'm winning.
And as it's backing up, it probably thinks I'm losing.
As you play the game, the Super Mario game,
you are told, nope, that didn't work,
nope, that didn't work, please try again.
But the important thing is that the winners
are always generating more repetitions per unit time.
It's just a repeat of performance, repeat of performance,
even if there are errors.
And that points to something vitally important,
which is reps are important,
but making error reps is also important.
In fact, it might be the most important factor.
So let's talk about errors and why those solve the problem
of what to focus on.
Because as I said earlier, if you want to learn something,
you need to know if it's open loop or closed loop,
and you need to know what to focus on,
where to place your perception.
And that seems like a tough task,
but errors will tell you exactly what to focus on.
So let's talk about errors and why you can leverage errors
to accelerate skill learning.
Okay, so we've established that performing
the maximum number of repetitions per training session
is going to be advantageous.
And that might seem obvious,
but there's a shadowy side to that, which is,
well, why would I want to just repeat the same thing
over and over again if I'm getting it wrong 90% of the time?
And the reason is that the errors
actually cue your nervous system to two things,
one, to error correction,
and the other is it opens the door
or the window for neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability
to change in response to experience,
essentially to custom modify itself
in order to perform anything better.
We did an entire month on neuroplasticity,
and I talked a little bit about errors
and why they're important.
Now we're going to make this very concrete
and operationalize it, make it very actionable.
There was a paper that was published in 2021
from Norman et al.
This is a very important paper.
It was published in the journal Neuron,
which is a cell press journal, excellent journal.
The title of the paper gives it away essentially,
which is Post-Error Recruitment
of Frontal Sensory Cortical Projections Promotes Attention.
Now, what that says is that when you make an error,
it causes an activation of the brain areas
that anchor your attention.
Remember, we need perception, attention,
which they're essentially the same thing.
We need proprioception,
and we need the upper and lower motor neurons
to communicate in the proper ways.
And this vital question is what to pay attention to.
Errors tell your nervous system
that something needs to change.
So if you are performing a task or a skill,
like you're learning how to dance
and you're stepping on the other person's toes
or you're fumbling or you're not getting it right,
those errors are opening the possibility for plasticity.
If you walk away at that point,
you've made the exact wrong choice, okay?
Unless the errors are somehow hazardous to your health
or somebody else's wellbeing,
you want to continue to engage at a high repetition rate.
That's really where the learning is possible.
Without errors, the brain is not in a position
to change itself.
Errors actually cue the frontal cortex networks,
what we call top-down processing,
and the neuromodulators,
things like dopamine and acetylcholine and epinephrine,
that will allow for plasticity.
So while the Super Mario experiment, the maze experiment,
was only focused on generating errors,
telling people that wasn't right, please try again,
or that wasn't right, you lost five points,
the key distinction is that the errors themselves
cued people to the fact that they needed to change something.
So if you're trying to learn a new skill
and you're screwing up and you're making mistakes,
the more mistakes you make,
the more plastic your brain becomes,
such that when you get it right,
that correct pattern will be rewarded and consolidated.
And you can trust that it will
because the performance of something correctly
is associated with the release
of this neuromodulator dopamine.
Dopamine is involved in craving and motivation,
it's involved in a lot of things,
but it's also involved in learning.
We will do an entire episode on dopamine and learning,
but because some of you are probably wondering,
this does not mean that just increasing
your dopamine levels before learning
will allow you to learn faster.
In fact, increasing your dopamine levels
before learning using pharmacology
will actually reduce what's called the signal to noise.
It will make these increases in dopamine
that pop up in your brain that suddenly make you realize,
ah, I got that one right.
It will make those smaller
relative to the background levels of dopamine, okay?
You want a big spike in dopamine
when you perform a motor pattern correctly,
and you want to make lots of errors,
many, many repetitions of errors
in order to get to that correct performance.
Now, if you're like most people,
you're going to do this in a way that's somewhat random,
meaning, let's say it's a tennis serve,
I can't play tennis,
I think I've probably played tennis twice.
So if I throw the ball up in the air and hit it,
I'm going to get it wrong and probably hit the net,
then I'm going to hit the net.
Then I'll probably go too long,
then I'll probably go over the fence.
At some point, I like to think I'll get it correct.
The dopamine signal for that is going to be quite big,
and I'll think, okay, what did I do there?
I actually don't know, I wasn't paying attention.
What I was paying attention to is whether or not the ball
went to the correct location
on the opposite side of the net.
Remember, it's an open loop move,
so I don't actually know what I did correctly,
but your nervous system will take care of that
provided I, in this case,
complete more and more and more repetitions.
Now, if I were to just elevate my basal level of dopamine
by taking, I don't know,
1,500 milligrams of L-tyrosine or something,
that would be bad because the increase in dopamine
would actually be much lower, right?
We would say the delta is smaller,
the signal to noise is smaller
if my overall levels of dopamine are very, very high,
so I'm actually going to learn less well.
So for skill learning, motor skill learning,
increasing your dopamine levels prior is not a good idea.
It might help with motivation to get to the learning,
but it's not going to improve the plasticity process itself
and it's likely to hinder it,
and so that's very important.
So these errors cue the brain that something was wrong
and they open up the possibility for plasticity.
It's what's sometimes called the framing effect.
It frames what's important,
and so I think this is a shift that we've heard about,
you know, growth mindset, which is the incredible discovery
and theory and practice of my colleague,
Carol Dweck at Stanford.
This is distinct from that, right?
This isn't about motivation to learn.
This is about how you actually learn.
So the key is designate a particular block of time
that you are going to perform repetitions.
So maybe that's 30 minutes, maybe that's an hour.
Work for time and then try and perform the maximum number
of repetitions that you can do safely
for you and others per unit time.
That's going to be the best way to approach learning
for most sessions.
I will talk about other things that one can do,
but making errors is key,
and this isn't a motivational speech.
I'm not saying, oh, go make errors.
Errors are good for you.
You have to fail in order to win.
No, you have to fail in order to open up
the possibility of plasticity,
but you have to fail many times within the same session,
and those failures will cue your attention
to the appropriate sensory events.
Now, sometimes we're working with a coach,
and so this is a shout out to all the coaches.
Thank you for doing what you do.
However, there needs to be,
at least what the scientific literature say,
there needs to be a period of each training session
whereby the athlete or the person of any kind
can simply pay attention to their errors
without their attention being cued to something else.
A really well-trained coach will say,
oh, you know, your elbow's swinging too high
or you're not gripping the racket
in the appropriate way, et cetera.
They can see things that the practitioner can't see,
and of course that's vitally important,
but the practitioner also needs
to use this error recognition signal.
They need to basically focus on something,
and the errors are going to tell them what to focus on.
So put simply, there needs to be a period of time
in which it's just repetition after repetition
after repetition.
I think many people, including coaches,
are afraid that bad habits will get ingrained,
and while indeed that's possible,
it's very important that these errors occur
in order to cue the attentional systems
and to open the door for plasticity.
So if I'm told, look, you know, I'm standing a little wide,
I need to tighten up my stance a little bit, great,
but then I need to generate many repetitions
from that tightened stance, okay?
So if I'm constantly being cued from the outside
about what I'm doing incorrectly,
that's not going to be as efficient, okay?
So for some people, these learning sessions
might be 10 minutes.
For some people, it might be an hour.
Whatever you can allocate, because your lifestyles will vary
and whether or not you're a professional athlete,
et cetera, will vary,
you want to get the maximum number of repetitions in
and you want to make errors.
That's allowing for plasticity.
So science points to the fact
that there's a particular sequencing of learning sessions
that will allow you to learn faster
and to retain the skill learning,
and it involves doing exactly as I just described,
which is getting as many repetitions as you can
in the learning session,
paying attention to the errors that you make,
and then the rewards that will be generated,
again, these are neurochemical rewards,
from the successful performance of a movement
or the approximate successful performance.
So maybe you get the golf swing better, but not perfect,
but that's still going to be rewarded
with this neurochemical mechanism.
And then after the session,
you need to do something very specific, which is nothing.
That's right.
There are beautiful data describing neurons
in our hippocampus,
this area of our brain involved in the consolidation
of new memories.
Those data point to the fact that in sleep,
there's a replay of the sequence of neurons
that were involved in certain behaviors the previous day,
and sometimes the previous day before that.
However, there are also data that show
that after a skill learning session,
any kind of motor movement,
provided you're not bringing in
a lot more additional new sensory stimuli,
there's a replay of the motor sequence
that you performed correctly,
and there's an elimination of the motor sequences
that you performed incorrectly,
and they are run backward in time, okay?
So to be very clear about this,
if I were to learn a new skill or navigate a new city,
or let's just stay with the motor skill,
let's say the free throw or a golf swing or a tennis serve,
dance move novice,
so I'm still going to make a lot of errors,
don't get it perfectly,
but maybe I get a little bit better
where I perform it correctly three times out of 1,000,
and it sounds like something I might do,
and there I'm probably being generous to myself.
After I finished the training session,
if I do nothing,
I'm not focused on some additional learning,
I'm not bringing a lot of sensory information in,
if I just sit there and close my eyes
for five to 10 minutes, even one minute,
the brain starts to replay the motor sequence
corresponding to the correct pattern of movement,
but it plays that sequence backward.
Now, why it plays it backward, we don't know.
If I were to wait until sleep,
or regardless of when I sleep later that night,
the sequence will be replayed forwards
in the proper sequence,
immediately afterward, it's played backward
for reasons that are still unclear,
but the replay of that sequence backwards
appears to be important
for the consolidation of the skill learning.
Now, this is important
because many people are finishing their jujitsu class,
or they're finishing their yoga class,
or they're finishing their dance class,
or they're finishing some skill learning,
and then they're immediately devoting their attention
to something else.
You hear a lot about visualization,
and we are going to talk about visualization,
but in the kind of obsession
with the idea that we can learn things
just sitting there with our eyes closed
without having to perform a movement,
we've overlooked something perhaps even more important,
or at least equally important,
which is after skill learning,
after putting effort into something,
sitting quietly with the eyes closed
for one to five to 10 minutes
allows the brain to replay the sequence
in a way that appears important
for the more rapid consolidation
of the motor sequence of the pattern
and to accelerated learning.
If you'd like to learn more about this,
this is not work that I was involved in.
I want to be very clear.
There's an excellent paper that covers this and much more
for those of you that really want to dive deep on this,
and we will dive deeper in a moment.
This is a review that was published in the journal Neuron,
excellent journal.
Many of the papers that I'm referring to
were covered in this review,
which is titled neuroplasticity
sub-serving motor skill learning
by Dayan, D-A-Y-A-N,
I hope I'm not butchering the pronunciation,
and Cohen by Leonard Cohen,
but not the Leonard Cohen most of us are familiar with,
the musician Leonard Cohen.
Dayan and Cohen,
neuroplasticity sub-serving motor skill learning,
and this was published in 2011,
but there have been a number of updates
and the literature that I've described
in other portions of today's episode
come from the more recent literature,
such as the more recent 2021 paper, okay?
So you have this basic learning session
and then a period of time afterwards
in which the brain can rehearse what it just did.
We hear so much about mental rehearsal,
and we always think about mental rehearsal
as the thing you do before you train or instead of training,
but this is rehearsal that's done afterward
where the brain is just automatically scripting
through the sequence,
and for some reason that's still not clear
as to why this would be the case, it runs backward.
Then in sleep, it runs forwards,
and certainly, absolutely,
sleep and quality sleep of the appropriate duration, et cetera
is going to be important for learning of all kinds,
including skill learning.
We did an entire four episodes on sleep
and how to get better at sleeping.
Those are the episodes back in January,
episodes essentially one, two, three, and four,
and maybe even episode five, I don't recall,
but you can go there to find out
all about how to get better at sleeping.
Now, there are other training sessions involved, right?
I'm not going to learn the perfect golf swing
or the tennis serve or how to dance in one session,
and I doubt you will either.
So the question is when to come back
and what to do when you come back to the training session.
Now, first of all,
this principle of errors, cuing attention
and opening the opportunity for plasticity,
that's never going to change.
That's going to be true for somebody who is hyper-skilled,
who's even has mastery or even virtuosity
in a given skill, right?
Remember, when you're unskilled at something,
uncertainty is very high.
As you become more skilled, certainty goes up, right?
Then eventually you achieve levels of mastery
where certainty is very, very high about your ability
to perform yours certainty and that of other people.
And then there's this fourth category of virtuosity
where somebody, maybe you,
invites uncertainty back into the practice
because only with that uncertainty
can you express your full range of abilities,
which you aren't even aware of
until uncertainty comes into the picture, right?
I happen to have the great privilege
of being friends with Laird Hamilton,
the big wave surfer, who's phenomenal.
I don't surf.
I certainly don't surf with Laird,
but he and another guy that he surfs with,
Luca Padua, these guys, they're virtuosos at surfing.
They don't just want the wave that they can master.
They want uncertainty.
They're at the point in their practice
where when uncertainty shows up,
like a wave that's either so big
or is moving in a particular way
that it brings an element of uncertainty for them
about what they're going to do,
that they recognize that as the opportunity
to perform better than they would otherwise, okay?
So they're actually trying to eliminate uncertainty.
At the beginning of learning any skill
and as we approach from uncertain to skilled to mastery,
we want to reduce uncertainty.
And that's really what the nervous system is doing.
It's trying to eliminate errors
and hone in on the correct trajectories.
If you perform a lot of repetitions
and then you use a period immediately after,
we don't really have a name for this.
Maybe someone will come up with it
and put it in the comment section if you're on YouTube,
if you're watching this on YouTube,
a name for this post-learning kind of idle time
for the brain, the brain isn't idle at all.
It's actually scripting all these things in reverse
that allow for deeper learning and more quick learning.
But if we fill that time with other things,
if we are focused on our phones
or we're focused on learning something else,
we're focusing on our performance,
that's not going to serve us well.
It's at least it's not going to serve
the skill learning well.
So please, if you're interested in more rapid skill learning
try introducing these sessions, they can be quite powerful.
And then on subsequent sessions,
presumably after a night's sleep
or maybe you're doing two sessions a day,
although two sessions a day is going to be a lot
for most people, unless you're a professional
or a high level athlete.
The subsequent sessions are where you get to express
the gains of the previous session, right?
Where you get to perform well, presumably more often,
even if it's just subtle,
sometimes there'll be a decrease in performance,
but most often you're going to perform better
on subsequent and subsequent training sessions.
And there is the opportunity to devote attention
in very specific ways, right?
Not just let the errors inform you
where to place your attention,
but rather to direct your perception
to particular elements of the movement
in order to accelerate learning further, okay?
So to be very clear,
cause I know many of you are interested
in concrete protocols.
It's not just that you would only let errors
cue your attention on the first session.
You might do that for one session or five sessions,
it's going to depend.
But once you're familiar with something
and you're performing it well every once in a while,
you're accomplishing it better every once in a while,
then you can start to cue your attention
in very deliberate ways.
And the question therefore becomes
what to cue your attention to.
And the good news is it doesn't matter.
There is a beautiful set of experiments
that have been done looking at sequences of keys
being played on a piano.
This is work that was published just a couple of years ago.
There are actually several papers now
that are focused on this.
One of them was published in 2018.
This is from Claudia Lape and colleagues, L-A-P-P-E.
She's done some really nice work,
which talks about the influence of pitch feedback
on learning of motor timing and sequencing.
And this was done with piano,
but it carries over to athletic performance as well.
So I'm going to describe this study to you.
But before I describe it,
what is so interesting about this study
that I want you to know about
is that it turns out it doesn't matter so much
what you pay attention to during the learning sequence,
provided it's something related to the motor behavior
that you're performing, right?
That seems incredible, right?
I'm not good at a tennis serve.
So if I've done, you know,
let's say a thousand repetitions of the tennis serve,
maybe I got it right three to 10 times.
Now I'm being even more generous with myself.
And I do this post-training session
where I let my brain idle and I get some good sleep
and I come back and now I start generating errors again,
presumably or hopefully fewer errors,
but I decide I'm going to cue my attention
to something very specific,
like maybe how tightly I'm holding the racket,
or maybe it's my stance,
or maybe it's whether or not I rotate my right shoulder in
as I hit the ball across the net, I'm making this up again.
I don't play tennis.
It turns out that as long as it's the same thing
throughout the session, learning is accelerated.
And I'll explain why this makes sense in a moment,
but just to be really clear, you can, and one should,
use your powers of attention to direct your attention
to particular aspects of a motor movement.
Once you're familiar with the general theme of the movement,
but what you pay attention to exactly is not important.
What's important is that you pay attention
to one specific thing.
So what Claudia Lappe and colleagues showed
was that if people are trying to learn a sequence of keys
on the piano, there are multiple forms of feedback.
There are error signals.
If, for instance, they hear a piece of music
and then they're told to press the keys
in a particular sequence and the noise that comes out,
the sound that comes out of the piano
does not sound like the song they just heard, right?
So instead of, and here, forgive me,
because I'm neither musical nor can I sing,
but instead of, da, da, da, da, da, da,
they hear that, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da,
and then instead when they play,
or if it were me, it would sound something like,
da, da, da, da, da, da, it wouldn't sound right, okay?
It wouldn't sound right because I likely got
the sequence wrong or I was pressing too hard on the keys
or too lightly on the keys, et cetera.
What they showed was if they just instruct people
about the correct sequence to press on the keys,
it actually doesn't matter what sound comes back
provided it's the correct sound or it's the same sound.
All right, so here's the experiment.
They had people press on these keys
and it was a typical piano
and it generated the particular sequence of sounds
that would be generated by pressing the keys on the piano.
Or they modified the keyboard, in this case, or piano,
such that when people pressed on the keys,
a random tone, different tones were played
each time they pressed on the keys.
So it sounded crazy, it sounded like noise,
but the motor sequence was the same.
Or they had a single tone
that was played every time they pressed a key
and the job or the task of the subject
was just to press the keys in the proper sequence.
So instead of da, da, da, da, da, da, da,
it was just da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da.
Instead of da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da,
it's da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da.
It's even hard for me to say an even tone,
but you get the idea.
So a singular tone, just think a doorbell being rung
with each press of the key would be really annoying, okay?
But it turns out that the rate to motor learning
was the same whether or not they were getting feedback
that was accurate to the keys of the piano
or whether or not it was a constant tone.
Performance was terrible
and the rates of learning were terrible
if they were getting random tones back.
So what this means is that learning to play the piano
at least at these early stages
is really just about generating the motor commands.
It's not about paying attention to the sound
that's coming out of the piano.
And this makes sense because when we are beginners,
we are trying to focus our attention
on the things that we can control.
And if you think about this, if you conceptualize this,
pressing the keys on the piano and paying attention
to the sounds that are coming out are two things.
So what this means is that as you get deeper
and deeper into a practice,
focusing purely on the motor execution can be beneficial.
Now, this is going to be harder to do
with open loop type things where you're getting feedback.
I guess a good example of open loop
would be the attempt at a back flip, right?
If you get it wrong, you will immediately know.
If you get it right, you'll immediately know.
Please don't go out and try and do a back flip
on the solid ground or even on a trampoline
if you don't know what you're doing,
because very likely you'll get it wrong
and you'll get injured.
But if it's something that is closed loop
where you can repeat again and again and again and again,
that is advantageous
because you can perform many, many repetitions
and you can start to focus or learn to focus your attention
just on the pattern of movement.
In other words, you can learn to play the piano
just as fast or maybe even faster
by just focusing on the sequence
that you are moving your digits, your fingers,
and not the feedback.
Now, I'm sure there are music teachers out there
and piano teachers that are screaming,
no, you're going to ruin the practice
that all of us have embedded in our minds
and in our students, and I agree.
At some point, you need to start including feedback
about whether or not things sound correct.
But one of the beauties of skill learning
is that you can choose to parameterize it,
meaning you can choose to just focus on the motor sequence
or just focus on the sounds that are coming back
and then integrate those.
And so we hear a lot about chunking,
about breaking things down into their component parts.
But one of the biggest challenges for skill learning
is knowing where to place your attention.
So to dial out again,
we're building a protocol across this episode.
Early sessions, maybe it's the first one,
maybe it's the first 10, maybe it's the first 100.
It depends on how many repetitions you're packing in.
But during those initial sessions,
the key is to make many errors,
to let the reward process govern the plasticity,
let the errors open the plasticity,
and then after the learning sessions,
to let the brain go idle,
at least for a short period of time,
and of course, to maximize sleep.
As you start incorporating more sessions,
you start to gain some skill level,
learning to harness and focus your attention
on particular features of the movement,
independent of the rewards and the feedback, right?
So the reward is no longer in the tone
coming from the piano,
or whether or not you struck the target correctly,
but simply the motor movement,
focusing your, for instance, in a dart throw,
on the action of your arm.
That is embedding the plasticity
in the motor pattern most deeply.
That's what's been shown by the scientific literature.
I'm sure there are coaches and teachers out there
that will entirely disagree with me, and that's great.
Please let me know what you prefer.
Let me know where you think this is wrong.
And it rarely happens,
but let me know where you think this might be right as well.
So we're breaking the learning process
down into its component parts.
As we get more and more skilled,
meaning as we make fewer and fewer errors
per a given session per unit time,
that's when attention can start to migrate
from one feature, such as the motor sequence,
to another feature, which is perhaps one's stance,
and another component of the sequence,
which would be the result that's one getting
on a trial-to-trial basis, right?
So changing it up each time.
So maybe I serve the tennis ball,
and I'm focusing on where the ball lands,
and then I'm focusing on the speed,
then I'm focusing on my grip,
then I'm focusing on my stance, from trial to trial.
But until we've mastered the core motor movements,
which is done session to session,
that, at least according to the literature
that I have access to here, seems to be suboptimal.
So hopefully this is starting to make sense,
which is that these connections
between upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons,
and central pattern generators,
you can't attack them all at once.
You can't try and change them all at once.
And so what we're doing is we're breaking things down
into their component parts.
Some of you may be wondering about speed of movement.
There are some data,
meaning some decent papers out there,
showing that ultra slow movements,
performing a movement essentially in slow motion,
can be beneficial for enhancing the rate of skill learning.
However, at least from my read of the literature,
it appears that ultra slow movements
should be performed after some degree of proficiency
has already been gained in that particular movement.
Now, that's not the way I would have thought about it.
I would have thought, well,
if you're learning how to do a proper kick
or a punch in martial arts or something,
that ultra slow movements at first
are going to be the way that one can best learn
how to perform a movement.
And then you just gradually increase the speed.
And it turns out that's not the case.
And I probably should have known that.
And you should probably know that
because it turns out that when you do ultra slow movements,
two things aren't available to you.
One is the proprioceptive feedback is not accurate
because fast movements of limbs are very different
than slow movements of limbs.
So you don't get the opportunity
to build in the proprioceptive feedback.
But the other reason why it doesn't work
is that it's too accurate.
You don't generate errors.
And so the data that I was able to find
showed that very slow movements can be beneficial
if one is already proficient in a practice,
but very slow movements at the beginning
don't allow you to learn more quickly
because you never generate errors
and therefore the brain doesn't, it's not open for change.
And the window for plasticity is never swung open
so to speak.
So brings us back to this theme
that errors allow for plasticity,
correct performance of movements
or semi-correct performance of movements cues
the synapses in the brain areas
and spinal circuits that need to change.
And then those changes occur in the period
immediately after skill learning and in sleep.
So super slow movements can be beneficial
once you already have some proficiency.
So this might be standing in your living room
and just in ultra slow motion performing your tennis serve,
learning to or thinking about
how you're adjusting your elbow and your arm
and the trajectory exactly how you were taught
by your tennis coach,
but trying to learn it that way from the outset
does not appear to be the best way to learn a skill.
When should you start to introduce slow learning?
Well, obviously talk to your coaches about this,
but if you're doing this recreationally
or you don't have a coach, I realize many of you don't,
I don't have a coach for anything that I do.
I'm going to just navigating it
by using the scientific literature.
It appears that once you're hitting success rates
of about 25 or 30%,
that's where the super slow movements
can start to be beneficial.
But if you're still performing things at a rate
of five or 10% correct and the rest are errors,
then the super slow movements
are probably not going to benefit you that much.
Also super slow movements are not really applicable
to a lot of things.
For instance, you could imagine throwing a dart
super slow motion,
but if you actually try and throw an actual dart,
the dart's just going to fall to the floor, obviously.
So there are a number of things like baseball bat swing,
which you can practice in super slow motion,
but if you try and do that with an actual baseball
or softball or something like that,
that's not going to give you any kind of feedback
about how effective it was.
So super slow movements or a decelerated movement
has its place,
but once you're already performing things reasonably well,
like maybe 25 to 30% success rate.
And I've tried this, I actually,
I struggle with basketball for whatever reason
and my free throw is terrible.
So I've practiced free throws in super slow motion
and I nail them every time.
The problem is there's no ball.
Some of you already have a fair degree of proficiency
of skill in a given practice or sport or instrument.
And if you're in this sort of advanced intermediate
or advanced levels of proficiency for something,
there is a practice that you can find interesting data for
in the literature, which involves metronoming.
So this you'll realize relates to generating repetitions
and it relates to the tone experiment
where it doesn't really matter what your attention
is cued to as long as you are performing many, many reps
of the motor sequence.
You can use a metronome and obviously musicians do this,
but athletes can do this too.
You can use a metronome to set the cadence
of your repetitions.
Now for swimmers, there's actually a device
I was able to find online.
I forget what the brand name was
and that's not what this is about,
but that actually goes in the swim cap
that can cue you to when you need to perform another stroke.
And for runners, there are other metronome type devices
that through headphones or through a tone in the room
if you're running indoors or on a treadmill
will cue you to when you basically
you need to lift your heels.
And if you do that, what athletes find
is they can perform more repetitions,
they can generate more output, you can increase speed.
A number of really interesting things are being done
with auditory metronoming and then I'm involved
in a little bit of work now that hopefully
I'll be able to report back to you
about using stroboscopic metronoming.
So actually changing the speed of the visual environment.
These are fun experiments,
basically changing one's perception
of how fast they're moving through space
by playing with a visual system,
something for a future discussion.
But you can start to use auditory metronoming
for generating more movements per unit time
and generating more errors and therefore more successes
and more neuroplasticity.
There are a number of different apps out there.
I found several free apps
where you can set in a metronome pace.
So it might be tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick.
That's a little fast for most things
but you can imagine if this were darts
or this were golf swings that it might be tick, tick,
tick, tick or something more like tick, tick.
And every time the metronome goes, you swing.
Every time the metronome goes, you throw a dart.
There are actually some wild experiments out there.
There's a world championship of cup stacking.
There's a young lady who I saw could take all these cups
spread out on a table and basically just stack them
into the perfect pyramid in the least amount of times
all the kids go wild.
This is something I'd never thought to pursue
and frankly never will pursue
unless my life depends on it for some reason
but it's really impressive.
And if you look at the sequence
because these have been recorded
you can look this up on YouTube.
What you'll find is that these expert cup stackers
it's just all about error elimination
but there too metronoming and auditory cues
can actually cue them to pick up the cups faster
than they would ordinarily and to learn to do that.
You can do this for anything.
I think cup stacking is probably not a skill
most of you are interested in doing, but for any skill
if you figure out at what rate you are performing
repetitions per unit time
and you want to increase that slightly, you set a metronome
which is slightly faster than your current rate
and you just start generating more repetitions.
Now what's interesting about this and is cool
is it relates back to the experiment from
Lap and colleagues which is
your attention is now harnessed to the tone
to the metronome
not necessarily to what you're doing
in terms of the motor movement.
And so really you need a bit of proficiency.
Again, this is for people who are intermediate
or advanced, intermediate or advanced
but what you're essentially doing is
you're creating an outside pressure, a contingency
so that you generate again, more errors.
So it's all about the errors that you get.
Now these aren't errors where all the cups tumble
or you have to stop or you can't keep up.
You have to set the pace just a little bit
beyond what you currently can do.
And when you do that, you're essentially
forcing the nervous system to make errors
and correct the errors inside of the session.
I find this really interesting
because what it means is again,
you've got sensory perception
what you're paying attention to, proprioception
where your limbs are and the motor neurons
in your upper, lower motor neurons
and central pattern generators.
And you can't pay attention to it.
Well, they're my upper motor neurons,
they're my lower motor neurons.
Forget that, you're not going to do that.
You can't pay attention to your proprioception too much.
That would be the super slow motion
would be the proprioception.
But you have to harness your attention to something.
And if you harness your attention
to this outside contingency, this metronome
that's firing off and saying, now, go, now, go, now, go.
Not only can you increase the number of repetitions,
errors and successes, but for some reason
and we don't know why the regular cadence
of the tone of the metronome
and the fact that you are anchoring your movements
to some external force, to some external pressure or cue
seems to accelerate the plasticity
and the changes and the acquisition of skills
beyond what it would be
if you just did the same number of repetitions
without that outside pressure.
We don't know exactly what the mechanism is.
Presumably it's neurochemical.
Like there's something about keeping up with a timer
or with a pace that presumably, and I'm speculating here
causes the release of particular chemicals.
But I think it's really cool.
Metronomes, they're totally inexpensive.
At least the ones that you use outside of water
are very inexpensive.
You can find these free apps.
You can use a musical metronome.
So metronomes are a powerful tool as well.
In particular for speed work.
So for sprinting or swimming or running
where the goal is to generate more strokes
or more efficient strokes or more steps, et cetera.
The rate of the metronome obviously
is going to be very important.
Sometimes you're trying to lengthen your stride.
Sometimes you're trying to take fewer strokes
but glide further in the pool, for instance.
But the value of occasionally
just increasing the number of repetitions,
the number of strokes or steps, et cetera, per unit time
is also that you're training the central pattern generators
to operate at that higher speed.
One of the sports that's kind of interesting to me
is speed walking.
It's not one I engage in or ever plan to engage in.
But if you've ever tried to really speed walk,
it's actually difficult to walk very, very fast
without breaking into a run.
All animals have these kind of crossover points
where they go, where you go,
I think with horses, it's like, what is it?
They trot, then they gallop.
I don't know what's the next thing.
I don't know clearly.
I don't know anything about horses
except that they're beautiful and I like them very much.
But they break into a different kind of stride.
And that's because you shift over
to different central pattern generators.
So when you're walking or a horse is moving very slowly
and then it breaks into a jog and then into a full sprint
or I got to get gallop for the horse,
you're actually engaging
different central pattern generators.
And those central pattern generators
always have a range of speeds
that they're happiest to function at.
So with the metronoming for speed purposes,
what you do is you can basically bring the activity
of those central pattern generators
into their upper upper range
and maybe even extend their range.
And there's a fascinating biology
of how central pattern generators work together.
There's coupling of central pattern generators, et cetera,
in order to achieve maximal speeds and et cetera.
It's a topic for kind of an advanced session.
Costello loves this topic.
He just barked and loves it so much he barked again.
In any event, the metronome is a powerful tool,
again, for more advanced practitioners
or for advanced intermediate practitioners.
But it's interesting because it brings back the point
that what we put our attention to
while we're skill learning is important
to the extent that it's on one thing,
at least for the moment or trial to trial,
but that what we focus our attention on can be external.
It can be internal.
And ultimately the skill learning
is where all that is brought together.
So let's talk about where skill learning occurs
in the nervous system.
And then I'm going to give you a really,
what I think is a really cool tool
that can increase flexibility and range of motion
based on this particular brain area.
It's a tool that I used and when I first heard about,
I did not believe would work.
This is not a hack.
This is actually anchored deeply in the biology
of a particular brain region that we all have
whose meaning is mini brain.
And that mini brain that we all have
is called your cerebellum.
The cerebellum is called the mini brain
because it's in the back of your brain.
It looks like a little mini version
of the rest of your brain.
It's an absolutely incredible structure
that's involved in movement.
It also has a lot of non-movement associated functions.
In brief, the cerebellum gets input from your senses,
particularly your eyes and pays attention
to where your eyes are in space, what you're looking at.
It basically takes information about three aspects
of your eyes and eye movements,
which are occurring when your head goes like this,
which is called pitch, okay?
So this is pitch.
For those of you that are listening,
I'm just nodding up and down.
Then there's yaw, which is like shaking your head no
from side to side.
And then there's roll, which is like sometimes
if you see a primate, like a marmoset or something,
they will roll their head when they look at you.
Actually, the reason they do that
is it helps generate depth perception.
It's a kind of form of motion parallax
if you're curious why they do that.
It's not to look cute.
They do it because when they do that,
even if you're stationary and they're stationary,
they get better depth perception
as to how far away from them you are.
So you've got pitch, yaw, and roll.
And as you move your head and as you move your body
and you move through space,
the image on your retina moves, pitch, yaw, and roll,
and some combination.
That information is relayed to your cerebellum.
So it's rich with visual information.
There's also a map of your body surface
and your movements and timing in the cerebellum.
So it's an incredible structure
that brings together timing of movements,
which limbs are moving, and has proprioceptive information.
It really is a mini brain.
It's just the coolest little structure back there.
And in humans, it's actually not that little.
It's just an incredible structure.
Now, all this information is integrated there,
but what most people don't tell us
is that a lot of learning of motor sequences,
of skill learning that involved timing
occurs in the cerebellum.
Now, you can't really use that information
except to know that after you learn something pretty well,
it's handed off or kind of handled by your cerebellum.
But there is something that you can do with your cerebellum
to increase range of motion and flexibility.
Much of our flexibility, believe it or not,
is not because our tendons are of particular length
or elasticity, although that plays some role.
It's not because our muscles are short.
I don't know what that would even mean.
Some people have longer muscle bellies
or shorter muscle bellies,
but your muscles always essentially span the entire length
of the bone or limb or close to it,
along with your tendons.
But it has to do with the neural innervation of muscle
and the fact that when muscles are elongated,
there's a point at which they won't stretch out
any longer and the nerves fire and they shut down.
You actually have inhibitory pathways
that prevent you from contracting the muscles
or from extending them, from stretching them out anymore.
So you can do this right now.
If you're driving, don't do it,
because unless you have a self-driving car,
you'll need to take your hands off the steering wheel.
But because of the way that vision
and your muscles are represented in your cerebellum,
it turns out that your range of visual motion
and your range of vision,
literally how wide a field of view you take,
impacts how far you can extend your limbs, okay?
So we'll talk about this in a second,
and about exactly how to do this and explore this.
But as you move through space, as you walk forward,
or you walk backward, or you tilt your head,
or you learn a skill, or you just operate
in the normal ways throughout your day,
driving, biking, et cetera,
your eyes are generating spontaneous movements
to offset visual slip.
In other words, you don't see the world as blurry
even though you're moving,
because your eyes are generating
little compensatory eye movements to offset your motion.
So if I spin, we could do this experiment.
There's a fun experiment we do with medical students
where you spin them around in a chair
with their eyes closed, and then you stop,
and you have them open their eyes,
and their eyes are going like this,
doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, nice stagmus.
I don't suggest you do this experiment.
When we were kids, we did a different experiment,
which was to take a stick,
and to look at the top of the stick,
and to spin around on the lawn,
looking at the top of the stick,
then put it down on the ground and try and jump over it,
and you end up like jumping to the side,
you miss the thing entirely.
The reason those two quote unquote experiments,
which I hope you don't do, or force somebody else to do,
the reason they work is because normally your eye movements
and your balance and your limb movements are coordinated,
but when you spin around looking up at the stick,
what you're doing is you're fixating your eyes
on one location while you're moving,
and then when you stop,
those two mechanisms are completely uncoupled,
and it's like being thrown into outer space.
Never been to outer space, but probably something like that,
low gravity, zero gravity.
If you spin around in your chair with your eyes closed,
you're not giving the visual input that you're spinning,
and then you open the eyes,
and then the eyes only have what we call
the vestibular signal,
your eyes jolding back and forth, back and forth.
Again, these aren't experiments you need to do
because I just told you the result.
However, if you want to extend your range of motion,
you can do that by, these things always look goofy,
but at this point, I'm just kind of used
to doing these things.
If I want to extend my range of movement,
first I want to measure my range of motion.
So I'm trying to, if you're listening,
what I'm doing is I'm stretching out my arms
from like a T on either side,
and I'm trying to push them as far back as I can,
which for me is, you know,
feels like it's in line with my shoulders,
and I can't get much further.
I'm not really super flexible,
nor am I particularly inflexible, at least physically.
So what I would then do is stop.
I would move my eyes to the far periphery, right?
So I'm moving my eyes all the way to the left
while keeping my head and body stationary.
I'm trying to look over my left shoulder as far as I can,
then off to the right.
It's a little awkward to do this, then up, then down,
but I'm mostly going to just focus on left and then right.
Now, what that's doing is it's sending a signal
to my cerebellum that my field of view
is way over to there and way over to there.
Remember, your visual attention has an aperture.
It can be narrow or it can be broad.
And I've talked about some of the benefits
of taking a broad visual aperture
in order to relax the nervous system.
This is just moving my eyes, not my head,
like I just did for a second, from side to side.
Now I can retest, and actually,
you get about a five to 15 degree increase
in your range of motion.
Now I'm doing this for you.
You can say, well, you know, he gamed it
because he knew the result that he was hoping for,
but you can try this, okay?
And you can do this for legs too, right?
You can do this for any limb, essentially,
and it's purely cerebellar.
And it's because the proprioceptive visual
and limb movement feedback converge
in the ways that we control our muscle spindles
and the way we control the muscle fibers and the tendons.
And essentially, you can get bigger range of motion.
So I actually will warm up before exercise
or before skill learning by both doing movements
for my body, but also moving my eyes from side to side
in order to generate larger range of motion,
if range of motion is something that I'm interested in.
So that's a fun one that you can play with a little bit.
And it's purely cerebellar.
Some other time we'll get back into a cerebellar function.
There's all sorts of just incredible stuff
that you can do with cerebellum.
I talked in an earlier episode on neuroplasticity
about how you can disrupt your vestibular world.
In other words, by getting into modes of acceleration,
moving through space where you're tilted in certain ways,
it can open up the windows for plasticity
and yet other ways.
So you can check that out.
It's one of the earlier episodes on neuroplasticity
and everything's timestamped.
But meanwhile, if you want to expand your range of motion
before doing skill learning or afterward, this is a fun one.
It's also kind of neat
because I have this kind of aversion to stretching work.
It never seems like something I want to do.
And so I always put it off.
So if I start with the visual practice
of expanding my field of view off to one side
or the other side or up or down,
then what I find is I'm naturally more flexible.
I'm not naturally more flexible.
What's happened is I've expanded my range of motion.
Let's talk about visualization and mental rehearsal.
I've been asked about this a lot
and I think it relates back
to that kind of a matrix Hollywood idea
that we can just be embedded with a skill.
Although in this case, in fairness,
visualization involves some work.
And I've talked about this on an earlier episode
that some people find it very hard
to mentally visualize things.
And some people find it very easy.
There was great work that was done in the 1960s
by Roger Shepard at Stanford and by others,
looking at people's ability
to rotate three-dimensional objects in their mind.
And some people are really good at this
and some people are less good at this
and one can get better at it by repeating it.
But the question we're going to deal with today is,
does it help?
Does it let you learn things faster?
And indeed the answer appears to be yes, it can.
However, despite what you've heard, it is not as good.
It is not a total replacement
for physical performance itself, okay?
So I'm going to be really concrete about this.
I hear all the time that just imagining contracting a muscle
can lead to the same gains
as actually contracting that muscle.
Just imagining a skill can lead
to the same increases in performance
as actually executing that skill.
And that's simply not the case.
However, it can supplement or support physical training
and skill learning in ways that are quite powerful.
One of the more interesting studies on this
was from Ranganathan et al.,
forgive me for the pronunciation.
This was a slightly older paper, 2004,
but nonetheless was one that I thought
had particularly impressive results
and included all the appropriate controls, et cetera.
And what they did is they looked at 30 subjects
and they divide them into different groups.
They had one group perform essentially finger flexion.
So it was actually just sort of the,
imagine if you're just listening to this,
the come here finger movement.
They also had elbow flexion,
so it's our bicep curl type movement.
And they either had subjects do
a actual physical movement against resistance
or to imagine moving their finger
or their wrist towards the shoulder,
meaning at the bending at the elbow,
towards actual resistance.
Just to make a long story short,
what they found was that there were increases
in this finger adduction strength,
abduction, excuse me, strength of about 35%.
And the elbow flexion strength by about 13.5%,
which are pretty impressive considering
that it was just done mentally.
So they had people imagine moving against a weight,
a very heavy weight,
or had imagined people moving their wrist
towards their shoulder against a very heavy weight.
But again, they weren't doing it.
They were just imagining it.
Other experiments looked at the brain
and what was happening in the brain during this time.
So we'll talk about that in a moment.
But essentially what they found were improvements
in strength of anywhere from 13.5 to 35%.
However, the actual physical training group,
the groups that actually moved their wrist
or move their finger against an actual physical weight
had improvements of about 53%.
So this repeats over and over throughout the literature.
Mental rehearsal can cause increases in strength.
It can create increases in skill acquisition and learning,
but they are never as great if done alone
as compared to the actual physical execution
of those movements or the physical movement
of those weights, which shouldn't come as so surprising.
However, if we step back and we say, well,
what is the source of this improvement?
You might not care what the source is
because I could tell you it's one brain area
or another brain area, what difference would it make?
But again, if you can understand mechanism a little bit,
you're in a position to create newer
and even better protocols.
What mental rehearsal appears to do is engage the activity
of those upper motor neurons that we talked about
way back at the beginning of the episode.
Remember, you have upper motor neurons
that control deliberate action.
You've got lower motor neurons that actually connect
to the muscles and move those muscles
and you have central pattern generators.
Mental rehearsal, closing one's eyes typically
and thinking about a particular sequence of movement
and visualizing it in one's quote unquote mind's eye
creates activation of the upper motor neurons
that's very similar if not the same as the actual movement.
And that makes sense because the upper motor neurons
are all about the command for movement.
They are not the ones that actually execute the movement.
Okay?
Remember, upper motor neurons are the ones
that generate the command for movement,
not the actual movement.
The ones that generate the actual movement
are the lower motor neurons
and the central pattern generators.
So visualization is a powerful tool.
How can you use visualization?
Well, in this study, they had people perform this
five days a week.
I believe that it was 15, yes, it was 15 minutes per day,
five days a week for 12 weeks.
So that's a lot of mental rehearsal.
You know, it's not a ton of time each day,
15 minutes per day, but sitting down,
closing your eyes and imagining going through
a particular skill practice or moving a weight.
Maybe it's playing keys on a piano,
if that's your thing, or strings on a guitar.
For 15 minutes a day, five days per week for 12 weeks
is considerable.
I think most people, given the fact that the actual practice,
the physical practice is going to lead to larger
improvements, greater improvements than would,
the mental training would opt
for the actual physical training.
But of course, if you're on a plane
and you don't have access to your guitar
and you're certainly not going to be sprinting
up and down the aisle,
or you are very serious about your craft
and you want to accelerate performance of your craft
or strength increases or something of that sort,
then augmenting or adding in the visualization training
very likely will compound the effects
of the actual physical training.
There are not a lot of studies looking at how visualization
on top of pure physical training
can increase the rates of learning
and consolidation of learning, et cetera.
It's actually a hard study to do
because it's hard to control for,
because what would you do in its place?
You would probably add actual physical training
and then that's always going to lead to greater effects.
So the point is if you want to use visualization training,
great, but forget the idea
that visualization training is as good
as the actual behavior.
You hear this all the time.
People say, do you know that if you imagine an experience
to your brain and to your body,
it's exactly the same as the actual experience?
Absolutely not.
This is not the way the nervous system works.
I'm sorry, I don't mean to burst anybody's bubble,
but your bubble is made of myths.
And the fact of the matter is that the brain,
when it executes movement,
is generating proprioceptive feedback.
And that proprioceptive feedback is critically involved
in generating our sense of the experience
and in things like learning.
So I don't say this because I don't like the idea
that visualization couldn't work.
In fact, visualization does work,
but it doesn't work as well.
It doesn't create the same milieu,
the same chemical milieu,
the same environment as actual physically engaging
in the behavior, the skill, the resistance training,
et cetera.
And I'd be willing to wager that the same is true
for experiences of all kinds.
You know, PTSD is this incredibly unfortunate circumstance
in which there's a replay often of the traumatic event
that feels very real,
but that's not to say that the replay itself
is the same as the actual event.
And of course, PTSD needs to be dealt with
with the utmost level of seriousness.
It should be treated.
In fact, my lab works on these sorts of things,
but my point about visualization and imagining something
not being the same as the actual experience
is grounded in this idea of proprioception
and the fact that feedback to the cerebellum,
the cerebellum talking to other areas of the brain
are critically involved in communicating
to the rest of our nervous system
that not just that we believe something is happening,
but something is actually happening.
And in the case of muscle loads,
muscles actually feeling tension,
the actual feeling of tension in the muscle,
the contracting of the muscle under that tension
is part of the important adaptation process.
In a future episode, we'll talk about hypertrophy
and how that works at the level of upper motor neurons,
lower motor neurons, and muscle itself.
But for now, just know that visualization can work.
It doesn't work as well as real physical training
and practice, but these effects of, you know,
35% or 13.5% increases are pretty considerable.
They're just not as great as the 53% increases
that come from actual physical training.
For those of you that are interested
in some of the skill learning
that more relates to musical training,
but also how cadence and metronoming and tones, et cetera,
can support physical learning,
if you're interested in that, if you're aficionados,
there is a wonderful review
also published in the journal Neuron,
again, excellent journal, by Herholtz and Zatorre,
that's H-E-R-H-O-L-Z,
and Zatorre, Z-A-T-O-R-R-E,
that really describes in detail
how musical training can impact
all sorts of different things and how cadence training,
whether or not with tones or auditory feedback
and things of that sort,
carries over to not just instrumental music training,
but also physical skill learning of various kinds.
So if you want to do the deep dive, that would be the place.
You can find it easily online.
It's available as a complete article,
free of charge, et cetera.
Many of you are probably asking,
what can I take in order to accelerate skill learning?
Well, the conditions are going to vary,
but motivation is key.
You have to show up to the training session
motivated enough to focus your attention
and to perform a lot of repetitions in the training sequence.
That's just a prerequisite, right?
There's no pill that's going to allow you
to do fewer repetitions and extract more learning
out of fewer repetitions.
It's actually more a question of,
what are the conditions that you can create for yourself
such that you can generate more repetitions per unit time?
I think that's the right way to think about it.
What are the conditions that you can create for yourself
in your mind and in your body
that are going to allow you to focus?
And I've talked about focus and plasticity and motivation
in previous episodes.
Please see those episodes if you have questions about that.
I detail a lot of tools and the underlying science.
So for some people, it might be drinking a cup or two
of coffee and getting hydrated before the training session.
For some of you, it might be avoiding coffee
because it makes you too jittery
and your attention jumps all over the place.
It's going to vary tremendously.
There's no real, there is no magic pill
that's going to allow you to get more out of less.
That's just not going to happen.
It's simply not going to happen.
You're not going to get more learning
out of fewer repetitions or less time.
However, there are a few compounds
that I think are worth mentioning
because of their ability to improve
the actual physical performance,
the actual execution of certain types of movements.
And some of these have also been shown
to improve cognitive function,
especially in older populations.
So I'd be remiss if I didn't at least mention them.
I'm only going to mention one today, in fact.
The one that's particularly interesting
and for which there really are a lot of data is alpha-GPC.
And I'm going to attempt to pronounce
what alpha-GPC actually is.
It's alpha-glycerophosphocoline, right?
Alpha-GPC, alpha-glycerophosphocoline.
See, if I keep doing it over and over repetitions,
alpha-glycerophosphocoline.
There, I made an error.
Okay, so the point is that alpha-GPC,
which is at least in the United States
is sold over the counter,
typically is taken in dosages of about 300 to 600 milligrams.
That's a single dose or have been shown
to do a number of things
that for some of you might be beneficial.
One is to enhance power output.
So if you're engaging in something like shot put throwing
or resistance training or sprinting
or something where you have to generate a lot of power,
maybe you're doing rock climbing,
but you're working on a particular aspect
of your rock climbing that involves generating
a lot of force, a lot of power.
Well, then in theory, alpha-GPC could be beneficial to you.
For the cognitive effects, the dosages are much higher,
up to 1200 milligrams daily divided into three doses
of 400 milligrams is what the studies
that I was able to find show or used.
The effects on cognitive decline
are described as notable.
Notable meaning several studies showed a significant
but modest effect in offsetting cognitive decline,
in particular in older populations and some populations
even with some reported neurodegeneration.
Power output was notable.
How notable?
What does that mean, notable?
A study noted a 14% increase in power output.
That's pretty substantial, 14% if you think about it,
but it wasn't like a doubling or something of that sort.
Believe it or not, the symptoms of Alzheimer's
have been shown at least among the nutraceuticals
of which alpha-GPC is to significantly improve cognition
in people with Alzheimer's.
Now, this episode isn't about cognitive decline
and longevity, we will talk about that,
but this is a so-called another effect of alpha-GPC.
Fat oxidation is increased by alpha-GPC,
growth hormone release is promoted by alpha-GPC,
although to a small degree.
So as you can see, things like alpha-GPC in particular,
when they are combined with low levels of caffeine
can have these effects of improving power output,
can improve growth hormone release,
can improve fat oxidation.
All these things in theory can support skill learning,
but what they're really doing
is they're adjusting the foundation
upon which you are going to execute
these many, many repetitions, okay?
The same thing would be said for caffeine itself.
If that's something that motivates you
and gets you out of a chair
to actually do the physical training,
then that's something that can perhaps improve
or enhance the rate of skill learning
and how well you retain those skills.
Now, on a previous episode, I talked about,
and this was the episode on epinephrine, on adrenaline,
I talked about how for mental, for cognitive learning,
it makes sense to spike epinephrine,
to bump epinephrine levels up,
adrenaline levels up after cognitive learning.
For physical learning, it appears to be the opposite,
that if caffeine is in your practice
or if you decide to try alpha-GPC,
that you would want to do that before the training,
take it before the training, use it,
its effect should extend into the training,
presumably throughout, and then afterward,
if you're thinking about following
some of the protocols that we discussed today,
that you would use some sort of idle time
where the brain can replay these motor sequences in reverse,
and then, of course, you want to do things
that optimize your sleep.
A lot of the questions I get
are about how different protocols
and things that I described
start to collide with one another.
So let's say, for instance, you go to bed at 1030
and you're going to do your skill training at 930,
well, taking a lot of caffeine then
is not going to be a good idea
because it's going to compromise your sleep.
So I'm not here to design the perfect schedule for you
because everyone's situations vary.
So the things to optimize are repetitions, failures,
more repetitions, more failures,
at the offset of training,
having some idle time that could be straight into sleep,
or it could be simply letting the brain just go idle
for five to 10 minutes,
I mean, not focusing on anything,
not scrolling social media, not emailing,
ideally not even talking to somebody,
just lying down or sitting quietly with your eyes closed,
letting those motor sequences replay.
Then we talked about how one can come back
for additional training sessions,
use things like metronoming,
where you're cuing your attention to some external cue,
some stimulus, in this case, an auditory stimulus,
most likely, and trying to generate
more repetitions per unit time.
So again, it's repetitions and errors, that's key.
And then we also talked about some things that you can do
involving cerebellar neurophysiology
to extend range of motion,
if that's what's limiting for you,
or to use visualization to augment the practice,
or let's say your particular skill involves nice weather
and it's raining or snowing outside
and you can't get outside a thunderstorm,
then that's where visualization training
might be a good replacement under those conditions,
or in most cases, it's going to be the kind of thing
that you're going to want to do
in addition to the actual physical skill
or strength training session done,
at least in the study that we described,
for 15 minutes a day, five days a week,
over a period of 10 to 12 weeks or so.
So hopefully that makes it clear.
Today, we've covered a lot of mechanism.
We talked so much about the different motor pathways,
central pattern generators.
So you now are armed with a lot of information
about how you generate movement.
And I like to think that you're also armed
with a lot of information about how to design protocols
that are optimized for you,
or if you're a coach, for your trainees,
in order to optimize their learning of skills
of various kinds.
Today, we focused almost entirely on motor skills,
things like musical skills or physical skills.
These have some overlap.
They're partially overlapping with neuroplasticity
for learning things like languages or math or engineering
or neuroscience, for that matter.
Before we depart, I just want to make sure
that I return to a concept, which is the ultradian cycle.
Ultradian cycles are these 90-minute cycles
that we go through throughout sleep and wakefulness
that are optimal for learning and attention
in the waking state.
They are the stages of sleep
in which we have either predominantly
slow-wave sleep or REM sleep.
Some of you who have been following this podcast
for a while might be asking,
well, should a physical practice be 90 minutes?
That's going to depend because with physical practices,
oftentimes, for instance, with strength training,
that might be too long.
You're not going to be able to generate enough force output
for it to be worthwhile.
For golfing, I don't know, I've never played golf,
although my friends that play golf,
they disappear under the golf course for many hours.
So I know there's a lot of walking and driving
and other stuff.
I even hear that somebody carries your stuff around for you.
Sometimes, not always, but it's going to differ.
A four-hour golf game,
you're probably not swinging the golf club for four hours.
So it's going to depend.
I would say that the ultradian cycle
is not necessarily a good constraint for skill learning
in most cases.
And I should say that for those of you
that are short on time or have limited amounts of time,
10 minutes of maximum repetitions, maximum focus,
skill learning work is going to be very beneficial.
Whereas two hours of kind of haphazard,
not really focused work,
or where you're not generating very many repetitions
because you're doing a few repetitions
and you're texting on your phone
or paying attention to something else,
that's not going to be beneficial.
It's really about the density of training
inside of a session.
So I think you should let the,
work toward maximal or near maximal density of repetitions
and failures, provided they're failures
you can perform safely.
In order to accelerate skill learning
and don't let some arbitrary,
or in this case the ultradian constraint
prevent you from engaging in that practice.
In other words, get the work in,
get as much work done as you can per unit time.
And based on the science,
based on things that I've seen,
based on things that I'm now involved in
with various communities,
you will see the skill improve vastly at various stages.
Sometimes it's a little bit stutter start.
It's not always a linear improvement,
but you will see incredible improvement in skill.
If you're enjoying this podcast
and you're finding the information interesting
and or of use to you,
please subscribe on YouTube.
That really helps us.
As well, please subscribe
and download the episodes on Apple and Spotify.
On Apple, you also have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review
if you think we deserve that.
And on YouTube, please hit the thumbs up button
if you liked the episode,
and please give us feedback.
Place your feedback in the comment section.
That's a place to tell us how we're doing,
but also to ask us questions.
We read all the comments.
It takes us some time to work through them,
but we read all of them
and we use your comments and your feedback
to sculpt the content and the direction of future episodes.
As well, please check out our sponsors.
The sponsors that we mentioned
at the beginning of each podcast episode
are really important in order to support our production team
and as well, we have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman.
There you can support us at any level that you like.
In previous episodes and in this episode,
I mentioned some supplements.
Supplements certainly have their place for various things.
They aren't necessary, but many people, including myself,
derive benefit from supplements
for things like improving sleep
and immune system function and learning and so forth.
If you're interested in seeing the supplements that I take,
you can go to thorn.com slash you,
that's the letter U slash Huberman
and you can see the supplements that I take.
If you want to try any of those supplements,
you can get 20% off simply by accessing the Thorne webpage
through that portal, as well as 20% off
any of the other supplements that Thorne makes.
The reason we've partnered with Thorne
is because Thorne has the very highest levels of stringency
in terms of the quality of the supplements
and the accuracy about the amounts of each supplement
that are in the bottle.
One of the major problems in the supplement industry
is that when supplements get tested, often it's the case
that the amount of a given ingredient is far lower
or far greater than what's reported on the bottle.
That's not the case for Thorne.
Thorne has very high levels of stringency.
They partnered with the Mayo Clinic
and all the major sports teams
and that's why we've partnered with them as well.
So if you want to check those out,
again, it's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E slash the letter U
slash Huberman to get 20% off
any of the supplements that Thorne makes.
And last but not least,
I want to thank you for your time and attention.
I very much appreciate your interest in neuroscience
and in physiology and in tools that are informed
by neuroscience and physiology.
Today, we talked all about skill learning.
I hope that you'll consider the information.
You might even decide to try some of these tools.
If you do, please let us know your results with them.
Give us feedback in the comments.
And as always, thank you for your interest in science.
We'll see you next time.